Indian–American
relations
India United States
Diplomatic mission
Embassy of
India,
Washington,
D.C.
Embassy of
the United
States, New
Delhi
Envoy
Ambassador
Taranjit Singh
Sandhu
Ambassador
Eric Garcetti
Prime Minister Narendra Modi with
President Joe Biden in the Oval
Office in September 2021
India–United States relations
Relations between India and the United States date back to India's
independence movement and have continued well after independence
from the United Kingdom in 1947. Currently, India and the United
States enjoy close relations and have deepened collaboration on
issues such as counterterrorism and countering Chinese influence in
the Indo-Pacific.
[1]
In 1954, the United States made Pakistan a Central Treaty
Organization (CENTO) ally. As a result, India cultivated strategic and
military relations with the Soviet Union to counter Pakistan–United
States relations.
[2] In 1961, India became a founding member of the
Non-Aligned Movement to abstain from aligning with either the US
or the USSR in the Cold War.
[3] The Nixon administration's support
for Pakistan during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 affected relations
until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. In the 1990s, Indian
foreign policy adapted to the unipolar world and India developed
closer ties with the United States.[4]
In the twenty-first century, Indian foreign policy has sought to
leverage India's strategic autonomy to safeguard sovereign rights and
promote national interests within a multi-polar world.[5][6] Under the
administrations of Presidents George W. Bush (2001–09) and Barack
Obama (2009–2017), the United States has demonstrated
accommodation to India's core national interests and acknowledged
outstanding concerns.[7] Increase in bilateral trade and investment,
co-operation on global security matters, inclusion of India in
decision-making on matters of global governance (United Nations
Security Council), upgraded representation in trade and investment
forums (World Bank, IMF, APEC), admission into multilateral export
control regimes (MTCR, Wassenaar Arrangement, Australia Group) and
support for admission in the Nuclear Suppliers Group and jointmanufacturing through technology sharing arrangements have become
key milestones and a measure of speed and advancement on the path to
closer US–India relations.[8][9] In 2016, India and the United States
signed the Logistics Exchange Memorandum of Agreement[10][11] and
India was declared a Major Defense Partner of the United States.[12]
India and the United States have also stepped up their cooperation
among multilateral groups such as The Quad and I2U2 Group.
[13]
Gallup's annual World Affairs survey shows India is perceived by
Americans as their sixth favorite nation in the world, with 71% of
Americans viewing India favorably in 2015,[14] and 70% in 2023.[15] Gallup polls found that 74% of
Americans viewed India favorably in 2017,[16] 72% in 2019,[17] 75% in 2020[18] and 77% in 2022.[19]
According to a Morning Consult poll conducted in August 2021 after the fall of Afghanistan, 79% of Indians
Swami Vivekananda at the
Parliament of Religions with
Virchand Gandhi, Hewivitarne
Dharmapala, and A. G. BonetMaury in September 1893
viewed the United States favorably, compared to 10% who viewed the United States unfavorably, the highest
percentage out of all 15 major countries surveyed, more favorable than even how most Americans viewed the
United States.[20]
Great Britain and France had territories in the Americas as well as the Indian subcontinent. In 1778, when
France declared war against Britain, fighting broke out between British and French colonies in India.
[21] This
marked the beginning of the Second Anglo-Mysore War. Hyder Ali, the Sultan of the Kingdom of Mysore,
allied himself with the French. From 1780 to 1783, Franco-Mysorean forces fought in several campaigns
against the British in western and southern India, in several places such as Mahé and Mangalore.
[22]
On June 29, with both sides weakened, the British dispatched HMS Medea to surrender, with letters to the
French stating the American Revolutionary War was over.[23] The Treaty of Paris was drafted on 30
November 1782, months before the Siege of Cuddalore but news did not reach India until seven months later,
due to the delay of communications to India. The treaty was finally signed on 3 September 1783 and was
ratified by the U.S. Congress a few months later. Under the terms of the treaty, Britain returned Pondicherry
back to the French and Cuddalore was returned to the British.[22]
The flag of the East India Company is said to have inspired the Grand Union Flag of 1775, ultimately inspiring
the current flag of the United States, as both flags were of the same design.[24] Mysorean rockets were also
used in the Battle of Baltimore, and are mentioned in "The Star-Spangled Banner", the national anthem of
the United States: And the rockets' red glare, the bombs bursting in air.
[25]
The relationships between India in the days of the British Raj and the
United States were thin.[26] Swami Vivekananda promoted Yoga and
Vedanta in the United States at the World's Parliament of Religions in
Chicago, during the World's Fair in 1893. Mark Twain visited India in
1896[27] and described it in his travelogue Following the Equator with
both revulsion and attraction before concluding that India was the only
foreign land he dreamed about or longed to see again.[28] Regarding
India, Americans learned more from English writer Rudyard Kipling.
[29]
Mahatma Gandhi had an important influence on the philosophy of nonviolence promoted by American civil rights movement leader Martin
Luther King Jr. in the 1950s.[30]
In the 1930s and early-1940s, Roosevelt voiced strong support to the
Indian independence movement despite being allies with Britain.[31][32]
The first significant immigration from India before 1965 involved Sikh farmers going to California in the
early-twentieth century.[33]
During World War II, 1941-1945, India became the main base for the American China Burma India Theater
(CBI) in the war against Japan. Tens of thousands of American servicemen arrived, bringing all sorts of
advanced technology, and currency; they left in 1945. Serious tension erupted over American demands, led by
U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, that India be given independence, a proposition Churchill vehemently
rejected. For years, Roosevelt encouraged British disengagement from India. The American position was
based on an opposition to Europeans having colonies and a practical concern for the outcome of the war, and
the expectation of a large American role in a post-independence era. Churchill threatened to resign if
History
American Revolution and the East India Company
Under British Raj (1858–1947)
During World War II
American G.I.s at a market in
Calcutta in present-day Kolkata in
1945
U.S. President Harry S. Truman and
Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal
Nehru with Nehru's sister,
Vijayalakshmi Pandit, Indian
ambassador to the United States, in
Washington, D.C. in October 1949
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru
receiving U.S. President Dwight D.
Eisenhower at Parliament House
prior to Eisenhower's address to a
joint session of Parliament of India
in 1959
Roosevelt continued to push his case, causing Roosevelt to back
down.[34][35] Meanwhile, India became the main American staging base
to fly aid to China. During World War II, the Panagarh Airport in Bengal
Province of India was used as a supply transport airfield from 1942 to
1945 by the United States Army Air Forces Tenth Air Force and as a
repair and maintenance depot for B-24 Liberator heavy bombers by Air
Technical Service Command.
[36][37]
The United States under the Truman administration leaned towards
favouring India in the late-1940s as a consequence of most U.S. planners
seeing India more valuable diplomatically than neighboring Pakistan.[38]
However, during the Cold War, Nehru's policy of neutrality was
cumbersome to many American observers. American officials perceived
India's policy of non-alignment negatively. Ambassador Henry F. Grady
told then-Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru that the United States
did not consider neutrality to be an acceptable position. Grady told the
State Department in December 1947 that he had informed Nehru "that
this is a question that cannot be straddled and that India should get on
the democratic side immediately".[39] In 1948, Nehru rejected American
suggestions for resolving the Kashmir crisis via third party mediation.[40]
Nehru's 1949 tour of the United States was "an undiplomatic disaster"
that left bad feelings on both sides.[41] Nehru and his top aide V. K.
Krishna Menon discussed whether India should "align with United States
'somewhat' and build up our economic and military strength."[42] The
Truman administration was quite favorable and indicated it would give
Nehru anything he asked for. Nehru refused, and thereby forfeited the
chance for a gift of one million tons of wheat.[43] The American Secretary
of State Dean Acheson recognized Nehru's potential world role but added
that he was "one of the most difficult men with whom I have ever had to
deal."[44] The American visit had some benefits in that Nehru gained
widespread understanding and support for his nation, and he himself
gained a much deeper understanding of the American outlook.[45]
India rejected the American advice that it should not recognize the
Communist conquest of China, but it did back the US when it supported
the 1950 United Nations resolution condemning North Korea's
aggression in the Korean War. India tried to act as a mediator to help end
the war, and served as a conduit for diplomatic messages between the US
and China. Although no Indian troops took part in the war, India did
send a Medical Corps of 346 army doctors to help the UN side.[46]
Meanwhile, poor harvests forced India to ask for American aid for its
food security, which was given starting in 1950.
[47] In the first dozen
years of Indian independence (1947–59), the US provided
$1.700,000,000 in aid; including $931,000,000 in food. The Soviet
Union provided about half as much in monetary terms, however made much larger contributions in kind,
taking the form of infrastructural aid, soft loans, technical knowledge transfer, economic planning and skills
involved in the areas of steel mills, machine building, hydroelectric power and other heavy industries,
especially nuclear energy and space research.
[48] In 1961, the U.S. pledged $1,000,000,000 in development
loans, in addition to $1,300,000,000 of free food.[49] To ease the tensions, Eisenhower sent John Sherman
Cooper as ambassador in 1956–57. Cooper got along very well with Nehru.[50]
Independence (1947–1997)
U.S. ambassador to India John
Kenneth Galbraith (left) and U.S.
President John F. Kennedy, U.S.
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson,
and Indian Prime Minister
Jawaharlal Nehru at Joint Base
Andrews in Prince George's County,
Maryland in 1961
U.S. President Richard Nixon at the
arrival ceremony for Indian Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi on the South
Lawn of the White House in
November 1971
Indian Prime Minister Morarji Desai
in the Oval Office with U.S.
President Jimmy Carter in June
1978
In terms of rhetoric, Jawaharlal Nehru—as both prime minister and
foreign minister (1947–64), promoted a moralistic rhetoric attacking
both the Soviet bloc and the U.S. and its bloc. Instead Nehru tried to
build a nonaligned movement, paying special attention to the many new
nations in the Third World released from European colonial status at this
time. President Dwight D. Eisenhower and his Secretary of State John
Foster Dulles themselves used moralistic rhetoric to attack the evils of
Communism.[51]
In 1959, Eisenhower became the first U.S. president to visit India to
strengthen the staggering ties between the two nations. He was so
supportive that the New York Times remarked, "It did not seem to
matter much whether Nehru had actually requested or been given a
guarantee that the US would help India to meet further Chinese
Communist aggression. What mattered was the obvious strengthening of
Indian–American friendship to a point where no such guarantee was
necessary."[52]
During John F. Kennedy's presidency from 1961 to 1963, India was
considered a strategic partner and counterweight to the rise of
Communist China. Kennedy said,[53]
Chinese Communists have been moving ahead the last 10
years. India has been making some progress, but if India does
not succeed with her 450 million people, if she can't make
freedom work, then people around the world are going to
determine, particularly in the underdeveloped world, that the
only way they can develop their resources is through the
Communist system.
Relations took a nosedive when India annexed the Portuguese colony of
Goa in 1961, in which the Kennedy administration condemned the armed
action of the Indian government and demanded that all Indian forces be
unconditionally withdrawn from Goan soil, at the same time, cutting all
foreign aid appropriation to India by 25 percent.[54] In response, Menon,
now the Minister of Defence, lectured Kennedy on the importance of USSoviet compromise and dismissed the admonishments of Kennedy and
Stevenson as "vestige(s) of Western imperialism".[55] The Kennedy
administration openly supported India during the 1962 Sino-Indian war
and considered the Chinese action as "blatant Chinese Communist
aggression against India".[56][57] The United States Air Force flew in
arms, ammunition and clothing supplies to the Indian troops and the
United States Navy sent the USS Kitty Hawk aircraft carrier from the
Pacific Ocean to India, though it was recalled before it reached the Bay of
Bengal since the crisis had passed.[58][59] In a May 1963 National
Security Council meeting, the United States discussed contingency
planning that could be implemented in the event of another Chinese
aggression on India. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and General
Maxwell Taylor advised the president to use nuclear weapons should the
Americans intervene in such a situation. Kennedy insisted that
Washington defend India as it would any ally, saying, "We should defend
India, and therefore we will defend India."[60][61] Kennedy's ambassador
to India was the noted liberal economist John Kenneth Galbraith, who
was considered close to India.[62] While in India, Galbraith helped
establish one of the first Indian computer science departments, at the Indian Institute of Technology in
Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh. As an economist, he also presided over the (at the time) largest US foreign aid
program to any country.
Following the assassination of Kennedy in 1963, India-US relations deteriorated gradually. While Kennedy's
successor Lyndon B. Johnson sought to maintain relations with India to counter Communist China, he also
sought to strengthen ties with Pakistan with the hopes of easing tensions with China and weakening India's
growing military buildup as well.[63] Relations then hit an all-time low under the Nixon administration in the
early 1970s. Nixon shifted away from the neutral stance which his predecessors had taken towards IndiaPakistan hostilities. He established a very close relationship with Pakistan, aiding it militarily and
economically, as India, now under the leadership of Indira Gandhi, was leaning towards Soviet Union. He
considered Pakistan as a very important ally to counter Soviet influence in the Indian subcontinent and
establish ties with China, with whom Pakistan was very close.[64] The frosty personal relationship between
Nixon and Indira further contributed to the poor relationship between the two nations.[65] During the 1971
Indo-Pakistani War, the US openly supported Pakistan and deployed its aircraft carrier USS Enterprise
towards the Bay of Bengal, which was seen as a show of force by the US in support of the West Pakistani
forces.[66] Later in 1974, India conducted its first nuclear test, Smiling Buddha, which was opposed by the
US, however it also concluded that the test did not violate any agreement and proceeded with a June 1974
shipment of enriched uranium for the Tarapur reactor.[67][68]
In the late 1970s, with the Janata Party leader Morarji Desai becoming the prime minister, India improved its
relations with the US, led by Jimmy Carter, despite the latter signing an order in 1978 barring nuclear
material from being exported to India due to India's non-proliferation record.[69]
Despite the return of Indira Gandhi to power in 1980, the relations between the two countries continued to
improve gradually, although India did not support the United States in its role in the Soviet invasion and
occupation of Afghanistan. Indian Foreign Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao expressed "grave concern" over the
United States's decision to "rearm" Pakistan; the two countries were working closely together to counter the
Soviets in Afghanistan.[70] The Reagan administration led by US President Ronald Reagan provided limited
assistance to India. India sounded out Washington on the purchase of a range of US defence technology,
including F-5 aircraft, super computers, night vision goggles and radars. In 1984, Washington approved the
supply of selected technology to India including gas turbines for naval frigates and engines for prototypes for
India's light combat aircraft. There were also unpublicised transfers of technology, including the engagement
of a US company, Continental Electronics, to design and build a new VLF communications station at
Tirunelveli in Tamil Nadu, which was commissioned in the late 1980s.[71]
Under Bill Clinton (President 1993–2001) and P. V. Narasimha Rao (Prime Minister 1991–1996) both sides
mishandled relations, according to Arthur G. Rubinoff. Clinton simultaneously pressured India to liberalize
its economy while criticizing New Delhi on human rights and nuclear issues. In the face of criticism from
Washington and opposition at home, Indian leaders lost their enthusiasm for rapprochement and reverted to
formalistic protocol over substantive diplomacy. The Brown Amendment that restored American aid to
Pakistan in 1995 was an irritant. In returning to a Cold War style rhetoric, Indian parliamentarians and
American congressmen demonstrated their unwillingness to establish a new relationship.[72][73]
Soon after Atal Bihari Vajpayee became Indian prime minister, he authorised nuclear weapons testing at
Pokhran. The United States strongly condemned this testing, promised sanctions, and voted in favor of a
United Nations Security Council resolution condemning the tests. President Bill Clinton imposed economic
sanctions on India, including cutting off all military and economic aid, freezing loans by American banks to
state-owned Indian companies, prohibiting loans to the Indian government for all except food purchases,
prohibiting American aerospace technology and uranium exports to India, and requiring the US to oppose all
loan requests by India to international lending agencies.[74] However, these sanctions proved ineffective –
India was experiencing a strong economic rise, and its trade with the US only constituted a small portion of
its GDP. Only Japan joined the US in imposing direct sanctions, while most other nations continued to trade
with India. The sanctions were soon lifted. Afterward, the Clinton administration and Prime Minister
Vajpayee exchanged representatives to help rebuild relations.[75]
NDA I and II governments (1998–2004)
Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari
Vajpayee with U.S. President Bill
Clinton at Hyderabad House in New
Delhi in March 2000
Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari
Vajpayee with U.S. President
George W. Bush in New York City in
September 2003
Indian Minister of External Affairs
Pranab Mukherjee in the Oval
Office with U.S. President George
W. Bush in March 2008
In March 2000, Clinton visited India, undertaking bilateral and
economic discussions with Vajpayee. This would mark the first U.S.
presidential trip to India since 1978.[76] During the visit, the Indo-US
Science & Technology Forum was established.[77]
Over the course of improved diplomatic relations with the Bush
administration, India agreed to allow close international monitoring of
its nuclear weapons development, although it has refused to give up its
current nuclear arsenal.[78] In 2004, the US decided to grant Major nonNATO ally (MNNA) status to Pakistan. The US extended the MNNA
strategic working relationship to India but the offer was turned
down.[79][80]
After the September 11 attacks against the US in 2001, President George
W. Bush collaborated closely with India in controlling and policing the
strategically critical Indian Ocean sea lanes from the Suez Canal to
Singapore.
[75]
During the George W. Bush administration, relations between India and
the United States blossomed, primarily over common concerns regarding
growing Islamic extremism, energy security, and climate change.[81]
George W. Bush commented, "India is a great example of democracy. It is
very devout, has diverse religious heads, but everyone is comfortable
about their religion. The world needs India".[82] Journalist Fareed
Zakaria, in his book The Post-American World, described Bush as "being
the most pro-Indian president in American history."[83] Similar
sentiments are echoed by Rejaul Karim Laskar, a scholar of Indian
foreign policy and ideologue of Indian National Congress – the largest
constituent of the United Progressive Alliance (UPA). According to
Laskar, the UPA rule has seen a "transformation in bilateral ties with the
US", as a result of which the relations now covers "a wide range of issues,
including high technology, space, education, agriculture, trade, clean
energy, counter-terrorism, etc".[84]
After the December 2004 tsunami, the US and Indian navies cooperated
in search and rescue operations and in the reconstruction of affected
areas.[85]
Since 2004, Washington and New Delhi have been pursuing a "strategic
partnership" that is based on shared values and generally convergent geopolitical interests. Numerous
economic, security, and global initiatives, including plans for civilian nuclear cooperation, are underway.
First launched in 2005, cooperation on nuclear weapons reversed three decades of American nonproliferation policy. Also in 2005, United States and India signed a ten-year defense framework agreement,
with the goal of expanding bilateral security cooperation. The two countries engaged in numerous and
unprecedented combined military exercises, and major US arms sales to India were concluded. An Open
Skies Agreement was signed in April 2005, enhancing trade, tourism, and business via the increased number
of flights, and Air India purchased 68 US Boeing aircraft at a cost of $8 billion.[86] The United States and
India also signed a bilateral Agreement on Science and Technology Cooperation in 2005.[87] After Hurricane
Katrina, India donated $5 million to the American Red Cross and sent two planeloads of relief supplies and
materials to help.[88] Then, on 1 March 2006, President Bush made another diplomatic visit to further
expand relations between India and the U.S.[89]
The value of all bilateral trade tripled from 2004 to 2008 and continued to grow, while significant two-way
investment also grows and flourishes.[90]
UPA I and II governments (2004–2014)
The political influence of a large Indian-American community is reflected in the largest country-specific
caucus in the United States Congress,
[91] while between 2009 and 2010 more than 100,000 Indian students
have attended American colleges and universities.[92]
In November 2010, President Barack Obama visited India and addressed a joint session of the Indian
Parliament,
[93] where he backed India's bid for a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.
[94]
In March 2009, the Obama administration cleared the US$2.1 billion sale of eight P-8 Poseidons to India.[95]
This deal, and the $5 billion agreement to provide Boeing C-17 military transport aircraft and General
Electric F414 engines announced during Obama's November 2010 visit, made the US one of the top three
military suppliers to India (after Israel and Russia).[96] Indians have raised concerns about contract clauses
forbidding the offensive deployment of these systems.[97] India is trying to resolve performance-related
issues on the Boeing P-8I that have already been delivered to India.[98][99]
US Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mike Mullen encouraged stronger military ties between the two
nations, and said that "India has emerged as an increasingly important strategic partner [of the US]".[100] US
Undersecretary of State William J. Burns also said, "Never has there been a moment when India and America
mattered more to each other."[101] The Deputy Secretary of Defense, Ashton Carter, during his address to the
Asia Society in New York City on August 1, 2012, said that India–US relationship has a global scope, in terms
of the reach and influence of both countries. He also said that both countries are strengthening the relations
between their defense and research organizations.[102]
India, in July and November 2013, demanded that the U.S. respond to allegations that the Indian UN mission
in New York City and the Indian Embassy in Washington, D.C. had been targeted for spying.[103]
On July 2, 2014, U.S. diplomats were summoned by the Indian Ministry of External Affairs to discuss
allegations that the National Security Agency had spied upon private individuals and political entities within
India.[104][105] A 2010 document leaked by Edward Snowden and published by The Washington Post
revealed that US intelligence agencies had been authorized to spy on the Indian Prime Minister Narendra
Modi (who was then the chief minister of Gujarat).[106][107]
WikiLeaks revelations that Western intelligence agencies have used foreign aid workers and staff at nongovernmental organizations as non-official cover prompted India to step-up the monitoring of satellite
phones and movement of personnel working for humanitarian relief organisations and development aid
agencies in the vicinity of sensitive locations.[108][109]
According to some analysts, India–U.S. relations have been strained over the Obama administration's
approach to Pakistan and the handling of the Taliban insurgency in Afghanistan.[110] India's National
Security Adviser M. K. Narayanan criticized the Obama administration for linking the Kashmir dispute to the
instability in Pakistan and Afghanistan, and said that by doing so, President Obama was "barking up the
wrong tree."[111] Foreign Policy in February 2009 also criticized Obama's approach to South Asia, saying that
"India can be a part of the solution rather than part of the problem" in South Asia. It also suggested that India
take a more proactive role in rebuilding Afghanistan, irrespective of the attitude of the Obama
administration.[112] In a clear indication of the growing rift between the two countries, India decided not to
accept a US invitation to attend a conference on Afghanistan at the end of February 2009. Bloomberg has
also reported that, since the 2008 Mumbai attacks, the public mood in India has been to pressure Pakistan
more aggressively to take actions against the culprits behind the terrorist attack, and that this might reflect
on the upcoming Indian general elections in May 2009. Consequently, the Obama administration may find
itself at odds with India's rigid stance against terrorism.[113]
Strategic and military determinants
U.S. spying revelations
Foreign policy issues
President Barack Obama, U.S.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton,
and the Indian delegation at the
U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue
reception at the U.S. Department of
State in Washington, D.C. in June
2010
In the early 2010s, India and US governments have differed on a variety
of regional issues ranging from India's cordial relations with Iran and
Russia to foreign policy disagreements relating to Sri Lanka, Maldives,
Myanmar and Bangladesh.
Robert Blake, Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian
Affairs, dismissed any concerns over a rift with India regarding American
AfPak policy. Calling India and the United States "natural allies",[114]
Blake said that the United States cannot afford to meet the strategic
priorities in Pakistan and Afghanistan at "the expense of India".[115]
India criticized the Obama administration's decision to limit H-1B
(temporary) visas, and India's then External Affairs Minister Pranab
Mukherjee (later, the president of India until 2017) said that India would
oppose US "protectionism" at various international forums.[116] India's
Commerce Minister Kamal Nath said that India may move against
Obama's outsourcing policies at the World Trade Organization.
[117]
However, the outsourcing advisory head of KPMG said that India had no reason to worry, since Obama's
statements were directed against "outsourcing being carried out by manufacturing companies" and not
outsourcing of IT-related services.[118]
In May 2009, Obama reiterated his anti-outsourcing views and criticized the current US tax policy "that says
you should pay lower taxes if you create a job in Bangalore, India, than if you create one in Buffalo, New
York."[119] However, during the US India Business Council meeting in June 2009, U.S. Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton advocated for stronger economic ties between India and the United States. She also rebuked
protectionist policies, saying that "[United States] will not use the global financial crisis as an excuse to fall
back on protectionism. We hope India will work with us to create a more open, equitable set of opportunities
for trade between our nations."[120]
In June 2010, the United States and India formally re-engaged the US-India Strategic Dialogue initiated
under President Bush when a large delegation of high-ranking Indian officials, led by External Affairs
Minister S. M. Krishna, visited Washington, D.C. As leader of the US delegation, Secretary of State Clinton
lauded India as "an indispensable partner and a trusted friend".[121] President Obama appeared briefly at a
United States Department of State reception to declare his firm belief that America's relationship with India
"will be one of the defining partnerships of the 21st century."[122] The Strategic Dialogue produced a joint
statement in which the two countries pledged to "deepen people-to-people, business-to-business, and
government-to-government linkages ... for the mutual benefit of both countries and for the promotion of
global peace, stability, economic growth and prosperity."[123] It outlined extensive bilateral initiatives in ten
key areas: (1) advancing global security and countering terrorism, (2) disarmament and nonproliferation, (3)
trade and economic relations, (4) high technology, (5) energy security, clean energy, and climate change, (6)
agriculture, (7) education, (8) health, (9) science and technology, and (10) development.[124]
In November 2010, Obama became the second US president (after Richard Nixon in 1969) to undertake a
visit to India in his first term in office. On 8 November, Obama also became the second US president (after
Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1959) to ever address a joint session of the Parliament of India. In a major policy
shift, Obama declared US support for India's permanent membership on the UN Security Council.[125][126]
Calling the India–U.S. relationship "a defining partnership of the 21st century", he also announced the
removal of export control restrictions on several Indian companies, and concluded trade deals worth $10
billion, which are expected to create and/or support 50,000 jobs in the US.[127]
In December 2013, Devyani Khobragade, the Deputy Consul General of India in New York, was arrested and
accused by U.S. federal prosecutors of submitting false work visa documents and paying her housekeeper "far
less than the minimum legal wage."[128] The ensuing incident caused protests from the Indian government
Devyani Khobragade incident
and a rift in relations, with outrage expressed that Khobragade was strip-searched and held in the general
inmate population.[128] Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said that Khobragade's treatment was
"deplorable".[129]
India demanded an apology from the U.S. over her alleged "humiliation" and called for the charges to be
dropped, which the U.S. declined to do.[130] The Indian government retaliated for what it viewed as the
mistreatment of its consular official by revoking the ID cards and other privileges of U.S. consular personnel
and their families in India and removing security barriers in front of the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi.
[131]
The Indian government also blocked non-diplomats from using the American Community Support
Association (ACSA) club and American Embassy Club in New Delhi, ordering these social clubs to cease all
commercial activities benefiting non-diplomatic personnel by 16 January 2014.[132] The ACSA club operates a
bar, bowling alley, swimming pool, restaurant, video rentals club, indoor gym and a beauty parlour within the
embassy premises.[133][134] Tax-free import clearances given to US diplomats and consular officials for
importing food, alcohol and other domestic items were revoked with immediate effect. U.S. embassy vehicles
and staff were no longer immune from penalties for traffic violations. American diplomats were asked to
show work contracts for all domestic help (cooks, gardeners, drivers and security staff) employed within their
households.[135] Indian authorities also conducted an investigation into the American Embassy
School.
[136][137][138]
Nancy J. Powell, the U.S. ambassador to India, resigned following the incident, which was widely seen by
India "as fallout from the imbroglio."[139] Some commentators suggested that the incident and response
could lead to wider damage in U.S.–India relations.[140][141] Former Finance Minister Yashwant Sinha called
for the arrest of same-sex companions of US diplomats, citing the Supreme Court of India's upholding of
Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code whereby homosexuality is illegal in India.[142][143] Former State
Department legal advisor John Bellinger questioned whether the decision to arrest and detain Khobragade
was "wise policy ... even if technically permissible" under the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, while
Robert D. Blackwill, the former U.S. ambassador to India from 2001 to 2003, said the incident was
"stupid."[144][145] Nevertheless, within a year of the incident, U.S.-India relations were warming again, as U.S.
President Obama visited India in January 2015.[139]
Sectarian violence during the 2002 Gujarat riots damaged relations between the US Government and
Narendra Modi, then incumbent chief minister of Gujarat. Human rights activists accused Modi of fostering
anti-Muslim violence and persistently violating human rights agreements. New York based nongovernmental organization Human Rights Watch, in their 2002 report directly implicated Gujarat state
officials in the violence against Muslims.[146]
In 2012, a Special Investigation Team (SIT) appointed by the Indian Supreme Court found no "prosecutable
evidence" against Modi.[147][148] The Court absolved Modi of any criminal wrongdoing during the riots.
In 2005, the US Department of State used a 1998 International Religious Freedom Act (IRFA) provision to
revoke Modi's tourist/business visa citing section 212 (a) (2) (g) of the US Immigration and Nationality
Act.[149] The IRFA provision "makes any foreign government official who 'was responsible for or directly
carried out, at any time, particularly severe violations of religious freedom' ineligible for a visa to the United
States."
Prior to Narendra Modi becoming the Prime Minister of India, the US Government had made it known that
Modi as Chief Minister of Gujarat would not be permitted to travel to the US. Michael Kugelman of the
Wilson Center opined that although technically speaking there was no US 'visa ban' from 2005 to 2014, the
US government policy of considering Modi as persona non grata had resulted in a de facto travel-ban.[150]
After the US revoked his existing B1/B2 visa in 2005 and refused to accept his application for an A2 visa, the
US State Department affirmed that the visa policy remained unchanged : "(Mr Modi) is welcome to apply for
a visa and await a review like any other applicant".[151][152]
Relationship between US Government and Narendra Modi (2001–2014)
Indian Prime Minister Narendra
Modi with U.S. President Barack
Obama at Hyderabad House in
New Delhi in January 2015
Exploring opportunities on how to move the relationship out of a state of morose, Lisa Curtis, senior research
fellow for South Asia in the Asian Studies Center of The Heritage Foundation, says that, "the U.S. must first
signal its willingness and commitment to collaborating with the new government—and that it will not dwell
on the controversy of the 2002 Gujarat riots, which led the U.S. to revoke Modi's visa in 2005."[153]
In 2009, the U.S. Commission for International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) report[154] after ignoring the
views and decision of independent body (SIT) set up by India's highest judiciary[155] vehemently alleged that
there was "significant evidence" linking Narendra Modi to communal riots in the state in 2002 and asked the
Obama administration to continue the policy of preventing him from travelling to the United States of
America .[156][157]
The Obama administration maintained the 2005 decision taken by the George W. Bush administration to
deny Narendra Modi entry into the United States of America.[158] The US Government says that Modi can
circumvent the USCIRF sanctions regime by visiting Washington on a Heads of government A1-visa as long
as he is the Prime Minister of India.
[159] According to US State Department Spokesperson, Jen Psaki : "US
law exempts foreign government officials, including heads of state and heads of government from certain
potential inadmissibility grounds". The visa refusal came after some Indian-American groups and human
rights organizations with political view campaigned against Modi, including the Coalition Against
Genocide.
[160]
On June 11, 2014, Robert Blackwill, the former Coordinator for Strategic Planning and Deputy US National
Security Advisor during the presidency of George W. Bush, spoke at length about India–U.S. relations and
said : "Mr Modi is a determined leader. He is candid and frank. I also worked with him during the Gujarat
earthquake when I was posted as (the US) ambassador to India. ... It was mistake by the current Obama
administration to delay engagement with Mr Modi. I do not know why they did so but definitely, this did not
help in building relationship. ... The old formula and stereotypes will not work if the US administration wants
to engage with Mr Modi. The Indian prime minister is candid, direct and smart. He speaks his mind. The US
administration also has to engage in candid conversation when Mr Modi meets President Obama later this
year. They have to do something innovative to engage with him."[161]
Nicholas Burns, former U.S. Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs from 2005 to 2008, has spoken
about the visa denial by saying: "Bush administration officials, including me, believed this to be the right
decision at the time."[162][163] and has opined that "Now that it looks like Modi will become prime minister,
it's reasonable for the Obama administration to say it's been 12 years [since the 2002 riots], and we'll be
happy to deal with him"[164]
India–United States relations have improved significantly during the
Premiership of Narendra Modi since 2014.[165] At present, India and the
US share an extensive and expanding cultural, strategic, military, and
economic relationship[166][167][168] which is in the phase of implementing
confidence building measures (CBM) to overcome the legacy of trust
deficit – brought about by adversarial US foreign policies[169][170] and
multiple instances of technology denial[171][172][173] – which have plagued
the relationship over several decades.[174] Unrealistic expectations after
the conclusion of the 2008 U.S.–India Civil Nuclear Agreement, which
underestimated negative public opinion regarding the long-term viability
of nuclear power generation and civil-society endorsement for
contractual guarantees on safeguards and liability, has given way to
pragmatic realism and refocus on areas of cooperation which enjoy
favourable political and electoral consensus.
Key recent developments include the rapid growth of India's economy, closer ties between the Indian and
American industries especially in the Information and communications technology (ICT), engineering and
medical sectors, an informal entente to manage an increasingly assertive China, robust cooperation on
NDA government (2014–present)
Indian Prime Minister Narendra
Modi with U.S. President Donald
Trump at the 45th G7 in Biarritz,
France, in August 2019
counter-terrorism, the deterioration of U.S.-Pakistan relations, easing of export controls over dual-use goods
& technologies (99% of licenses applied for are now approved),[175] and reversal of long-standing American
opposition to India's strategic program.
Income creation in the USA through knowledge-based employment by Asian Indians has outpaced every
other ethnic group according to U.S. Census data.[176] Growing financial and political clout of the affluent
Asian Indian diaspora is noteworthy. Indian American households are the most prosperous in the US with a
median revenue of US$100,000 and are followed by Chinese Americans at US$65,000. The average
household revenue in the USA is US$63,000.[177]
The US and India continue to differ on issues ranging from trade to civil liberties. The Indian Home Ministry,
through an affidavit submitted to the Delhi High Court on 13 February 2015, claimed that Country Reports on
Rights & Practices have become instruments of foreign policy: "The US, UK and EU have clearly mentioned
in government documents and pronouncements that these reports are made for the purpose of their being
used as instruments of foreign policy." The affidavit also claimed that the reports by US, UK and European
Parliament were biased since they "do not provide opportunity to the Government of India or the local
embassy/high commission to record their opinion and are heavily biased against the targeted country".[178]
The 2014 State Department's annual Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report appeared to classify the Khobragade
incident as an example of human trafficking, stating: "An Indian consular officer at the New York consulate
was indicted in December 2013 for visa fraud related to her alleged exploitation of an Indian domestic
worker."[179] In response, India has shown no urgency to allow visits to India by the newly appointed US antihuman trafficking ambassador Susan P. Coppedge and the US special envoy for LGBT rights Randy Berry.
Under Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code homosexuality was illegal in India. Indian Ambassador to the US,
Arun K. Singh reiterated India's commitment to work within an international framework to tackle the
problem of trafficking but rejected any "unilateral assessments" by another country saying "We will never
accept it" and downplayed the importance of the visits: "When you ask a U.S. official when somebody will be
given a visa, they always say 'we will assess when visa is applied for.' ... I can do no better than to reiterate the
U.S. position."[180]
In February 2016, the Obama administration notified the US Congress that it intended to provide Pakistan
eight nuclear-capable F-16 fighters and assorted military goods including eight AN/APG-68(V)9 airborne
radars and eight ALQ-211(V)9 electronic warfare suites[181][182] despite strong reservations from US
lawmakers regarding the transfer of any nuclear weapons capable platforms to Pakistan.[183] Shashi Tharoor,
an elected representative from the Congress party in India, questioned the substance of India–U.S. ties: "I am
very disappointed to hear this news. The truth is that continuing to escalate the quality of arms available to
an irresponsible regime that has sent terrorists to India, and in the name of anti-terrorism, is cynicism of the
highest order".[184] The Indian Government summoned the US Ambassador to India to convey its
disapproval regarding the sale of F-16 fighter jets to Pakistan.[185]
In February 2017, Indian ambassador to the U.S. Navtej Sarna hosted a
reception for the National Governors Association (NGA), which was
attended by the Governors of 25 states and senior representatives of 3
more states. This was the first time such an event has occurred.
Explaining the reason for the gathering, Virginia Governor and NGA
Chair Terry McAuliffe stated that "India is America's greatest strategic
partner". He further added, "We clearly understand the strategic
importance of India, of India–U.S. relations. As we grow our 21st century
economy, India has been so instrumental in helping us build our
technology, medical professions. We recognise a country that has been
such a close strategic ally of the US. That's why we the Governors are
here tonight." McAuliffe, who has visited India 15 times, also urged other
Governors to visit the country with trade delegations to take advantage of
opportunities.[186]
Relationship under President Trump (2017-2021)
In October 2018, India inked the historic agreement worth US$5.43 billion with Russia to procure four S-400
Triumf surface-to-air missile defence system, one of the most powerful missile defence systems in the world
ignoring America's CAATSA act. The U.S. threatened India with sanctions over India's decision to buy the S400 missile defense system from Russia.[187] The United States also threatened India with sanctions over
India's decision to buy oil from Iran.
[188] According to the President of the U.S.-India Strategic Partnership
Forum (USISPF), Mukesh Aghi: "sanctions would have a disastrous effect on U.S.-India relations for decades
to come. In India’s eyes, the United States would once again be regarded as untrustworthy."[189] The Trump
administration avoided sanctioning India for the Russian S-400 missile system, but sanctioned Turkey and
China for the same purchases.[190]
President Trump has grown closer to India's BJP government, which shares the same right-wing views, he
has repeatedly praised Modi's leadership and avoided any negative criticism of the Indian government's
actions on the citizenship and Kashmir disputes.
[191][192] The Trump administration is consistent with the
Modi administration in combating "radical Islamic terrorism",[193] and the US reiterates its support for
India's elimination of terrorist training camp in Pakistan.
[194][195]
In early 2020, India provided its agreement for terminating an export embargo on a medicinal drug known as
hydroxychloroquine amidst the combat against the ongoing coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, after Trump
threatened retaliation against India, if it did not comply with terminating the export embargo on
hydroxychloroquine.[196][197]
In June 2020, during the George Floyd protests, the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial in Washington, D.C., was
vandalised by unknown miscreants on the intervening night of June 2 and 3. The incident prompted the
Indian Embassy to register a complaint with law enforcement agencies. Taranjit Singh Sandhu, the Indian
Ambassador to the United States called the vandalism "a crime against humanity".[198][199] U.S. President
Donald Trump called the defacement of Mahatma Gandhi's statue a "disgrace".[200]
On 21 December 2020, President of the United States Donald Trump awarded Modi with the Legion of Merit
for elevating India–United States relations. The Legion of Merit was awarded to Modi along with Prime
Minister of Australia Scott Morrison and former Prime Minister of Japan Shinzo Abe, the "original
architects" of the QUAD.
[201][202]
US-India ties began to strain in April 2021 when India faced a massive spike in COVID-19 infections. The US
had invoked the Defense Production Act of 1950 to ban the export of raw materials needed to produce
vaccines in order to prioritize domestic vaccine production.[203] According to The Times of India, this also
caused an explosion of anti-US sentiment in India, as the U.S. had vaccine reserves and refused to share
COVID-19 vaccine patents.[204] This came after a plea by Adar Poonawalla, CEO of the Serum Institute of
India, to lift the embargo on export of raw materials needed to ramp up production of COVID-19 vaccines,
was rejected.[197] However, in late April, right after a phone call with Ajit Doval, the National Security Advisor
of India, the Biden administration stated it would make raw materials necessary for production of the
Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine available to India, and began to send more than ₹714 crore
(equivalent to ₹798  crore or US$100  million in 2023) worth of drug treatments, rapid diagnostic tests,
ventilators, personal protective equipment, and mechanical parts needed to manufacture vaccines to India,
along with a team of public health experts from the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The US also stated that it planned to finance the expansion of Biological E. Limited, an Indian-based COVID19 vaccine production company.[205][206][207][208] India entered negotiations with the US after it declared
that it would share 60 million Oxford-AstraZeneca vaccines with the world.[209]
On April 7, 2021, The United States Navy guided missile destroyer USS John Paul Jones sailed through
India's Exclusive Economic Zone, without New Delhi's prior consent, then publicly announced the event,
causing a diplomatic spat.[210][211] At a time when the United States and India had been deepening relations,
such a move had raised eyebrows among the general public in both India and the United States. As per the
Modi–Biden relationship (2021 onwards)
USS John Paul Jones intrusion
The USS John Paul Jones off the
coast of California in November
2002
official statement by the United States Navy's 7th Fleet, "On April 7, 2021
(local time) USS John Paul Jones (DDG 53) asserted navigational rights
and freedoms approximately 130 nautical miles west of the Lakshadweep
Islands, inside India’s exclusive economic zone, without requesting
India’s prior consent, consistent with international law". India requires
prior consent for military exercises or maneuvers in its exclusive
economic zone or continental shelf, a claim inconsistent with
international law. This freedom of navigation operation ("FONOP")
upheld the rights, freedoms, and lawful uses of the sea recognized in
international law by challenging India's excessive maritime claims. The
Statement further added, "U.S. Forces operate in the Indo-Pacific region
on a daily basis. All operations are designed in accordance with
international law and demonstrate that the United States will fly, sail and
operate wherever international law allows."[212] The Pentagon defended
the 7th Fleet's statement by claiming that the event was consistent with international law.[211]
The Indian Ministry of External Affairs released its statement after much media attention, the statement said,
"The Government of India's stated position on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is that
the Convention does not authorize other States to carry out in the Exclusive Economic Zone and on the
continental shelf, military exercises or maneuvers, in particular those involving the use of weapons or
explosives, without the consent of the coastal state", it further added, "The USS John Paul Jones was
continuously monitored transiting from the Persian Gulf towards the Malacca Straits. We have conveyed our
concerns regarding this passage through our EEZ to the Government of USA through diplomatic
channels."[210][213] Former Chief of Naval Staff of the Indian Navy, Admiral Arun Prakash, commented on
the event by tweeting "There is irony here. While India ratified [the] UN Law of the Seas in 1995, the US has
failed to do it so far. For the 7th Fleet to carry out FoN missions in Indian EEZ in violation of our domestic
law is bad enough. But publicizing it? USN please switch on IFF!". He further tweeted, "FoN ops by USN
ships (ineffective as they may be) in South China Sea, are meant to convey a message to China that the
putative EEZ around the artificial SCS islands is an 'excessive maritime claim.' But what is the 7th Fleet
message for India?"[214][215]
Although there are certain differences over the war in Ukraine, the United States and India have
strengthened cooperation in defense, semiconductors, critical minerals, space, climate, education, healthcare
and other fields during the Joe Biden presidency.
[216] Biden also called the ties with India is "one of the
defining relationships of the 21st Century".[217] Modi and Biden reiterated the call for concerted action
against all groups identified by the United Nations as terrorist organisations, including Al-Qaeda, ISIS
(Daesh), Lashkar-e-Tayyiba (LeT), Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) and Hizb-ul-Mujhahideen (HuM). Also
mentioned the Afghan Taliban authorities and Pakistan should to stop terrorism.[218][219] The joint
Statement declared,[220]
No corner of human enterprise is untouched by the partnership between our two great countries,
which spans the seas to the stars.
The U.S. has four "foundational" agreements that it signs with its defence partners. The Pentagon describes
the agreements as "routine instruments that the U.S. uses to promote military cooperation with partnernations". American officials have stated that the agreements are not prerequisites for bilateral defence cooperation, but would make it simpler and more cost-effective to carry out activities such as refueling aircraft
or ships in each other's countries and providing disaster relief.[221] The first of the four agreements, the
Strengthen cooperation in various fields
Military relations
U.S. and
Indian Army
soldiers
during the
opening
ceremony of
Yudh Abhyas
at Joint Base
Lewis–
McChord in
Tacoma,
Washington in
September
2015
Sailors assigned to the guidedmissile destroyer USS Halsey
stand in ranks as the Indian
Navy frigate INS Satpura pulls
alongside during a Malabar
naval exercise in April 2012
U.S. soldiers of the 3rd Infantry Brigade, 2nd
Infantry Division and Indian Army soldiers of the
6th Battalion of the Kumaon Regiment, fire each
other's weapons during Yudh Abhyas in
September 2015
USAF F-15C Eagles
(middle of V formation)
from Elmendorf Air
Force Base in Alaska
fly with IAF SU-30MKI
Flankers (rear) and
Mirage 2000 aircraft
over the Indian
landscape during Cope
India in 2004, the first
bilateral fighter
exercise between the
two air forces in more
than 40 years
Sgt. Balkrishna Dave,
an India-born U.S.
Army paratrooper
explains weapons
range safety
procedures to Indian
Army soldiers before
their firing of American
machine guns at Yudh
Abhyas in May 2013
General Security Of Military Information Agreement
(GSOMIA), was signed by India and the U.S. in 2002. The
agreement enables the sharing of military intelligence between
the two countries and requires each country to protect the
others' classified information.
The second agreement, the Logistics Exchange Memorandum
of Agreement (LEMOA), was signed by the two countries on 29
August 2016. The LEMOA permits the military of either
country to use the others' bases for re-supplying or carrying
out repairs. The agreement does not make the provision of
logistical support binding on either country, and requires
individual clearance for each request.[222] The third
agreement, Communications Compatibility and Security
Agreement (COMCASA) was signed during the inaugural 2+2
dialogue in September 2018.[223] It is an India-specific variant
of Communications and Information Security Memorandum of
Agreement (CISMOA) that enables the two countries to share
secure communication and exchange information on approved
equipment during bilateral and multinational training
exercises and operations. The fourth agreement, the Basic
Exchange and Cooperation Agreement (BECA), signed in
2020, permits the exchange of unclassified and controlled
unclassified geospatial products, topographical, nautical, and
aeronautical data, products and services between India and the
US National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).[224]
Harsh V. Pant, professor of International relations at King's
College London, highlighted the importance of India to US
strategic planning by saying: "India is key to the US' ability to
create a stable balance of power in the larger Indo-Pacific and
at a time of resource constraints, it needs partners like India to
shore up its sagging credibility in the region in face of Chinese
onslaught." Robert Boggs, professor of South Asia Studies at
the Near East South Asia Center for Strategic Studies, opines
that the US "overestimates both India's desire to improve the
relationship and the benefits doing so would bring".[225]
As part of America's policies to counter China,[226] one of the
Trump administration policies are to make India as one of the
major defence partners for which it is in talks with Indian
representatives to sell highly technologically advanced
predator drones.[227] India has floated a tender to buy 100
multi role fighter aircraft in the Indian MRCA competition
(also called Mother of all defence deals), worth around US$15
billion under Narendra Modi's Make in India initiative.
Although the deal is yet to be finalised in 2018, the Trump
administration pushed for sales of advanced F-16 jet
fighters,
[228] and F/A-18 Super Hornet.
[229]
The Indian Army and US Army conducts an annual training
practice called Yudh Abhyas since 2002. In 2022, this exercise
was conducted in Uttarakhand.
[230]
In June 2015, US defence secretary Ashton Carter visited India
and became the first American defence secretary to visit an
Indian military command. In December of the same year,
An Indian Army officer is greeted by a U.S.
Army officer at Fort Bragg in Cumberland
County, North Carolina in May 2013
Indian External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar
meets U.S. Secretary of Defense of the United
States Lloyd Austin at The Pentagon in
Arlington County, Virginia in September 2022
Manohar Parrikar became the first Indian defence minister to
visit the US Pacific Command.
[231]
In March 2016, India rejected a proposal by the US to join
naval patrols in the South China Sea alongside Japan and
Australia. Defense Minister Manohar Parrikar said: "India has
never taken part in any joint patrol; we only do joint exercises.
The question of joint patrol does not arise."[232]
In January 2017, Peter Lavoy, Senior Director for South Asian
Affairs at the U.S. National Security Council, declared that the
partnership between India and the United States under Barack
Obama's administration had been "incredibly successful".
Lavoy stated, "I can tell you quite definitively that due to our
partnerships, several terrorism plots were foiled. Indian lives
and American lives were saved because of this
partnership."[233][234]
On October 27, 2020, the United States and India signed the
Basic Exchange and Cooperation Agreement (BECA), enabling
greater information-sharing and further defense cooperation,
to counter China's growing military power in the region.[235]
During the 2+2 ministerial dialogue the last agreement of four
so-called “foundational agreements” for sharing sensitive
information and sales of advanced military hardware.[236]
On August 16, 2022, US Air Force Secretary Frank Kendall said
that Indian defence attaché now has unescorted access to The
Pentagon and he also added that this is commencement with
our close relationship with India's status as a major defense
partner," and future added that "And if you don't think
unescorted access to the Pentagon is a big deal, I can't get into
The Pentagon without an escort,".[237]
During Modi's visit in 2023, the US and India agreed that
Hindustan Aeronautics would jointly produce GE F-414 jet engines.[238] The two sides also reached an
agreement to purchase MQ-9B drones.[216]
In 1998, India tested nuclear weapons which resulted in several U.S., Japanese, and European sanctions on
India. India's then defence minister, George Fernandes, said that India's nuclear programme was necessary
as it provided a deterrence to potential nuclear threats. Most of the sanctions imposed on India were removed
by 2001. India has categorically stated that it will never use weapons first but will retaliate if attacked.
The economic sanctions imposed by the United States in response to India's nuclear tests in May 1998
appeared, at least initially, to seriously damage India-US relations. President Bill Clinton imposed wideranging sanctions pursuant to the 1994 Nuclear Proliferation Prevention Act. US sanctions on Indian entities
involved in the nuclear industry and opposition to international financial institution loans for nonhumanitarian assistance projects in India. The United States encouraged India to sign the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) immediately and without condition. The United States also called for
Nuclear cooperation
Pokhran tests
restraint in missile and nuclear testing and deployment by both India and Pakistan. The non-proliferation
dialogue initiated after the 1998 nuclear tests has bridged many of the gaps in understanding between the
countries.
In late September 2001, President Bush lifted sanctions imposed under the terms of the 1994 Nuclear
Proliferation Prevention Act following India's nuclear tests in May 1998. A succession of non-proliferation
dialogues bridged many of the gaps in understanding between the countries.
In December 2006, the US Congress passed the historic India–United States Civilian Nuclear
Agreement|Henry J. Hyde US–India Peaceful Atomic Cooperation Act, which allows direct civilian nuclear
commerce with India for the first time in 30 years. US policy had been opposed to nuclear cooperation with
India in prior years because India had developed nuclear weapons against international conventions, and had
never signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NNPT). The legislation clears the way for India to buy US
nuclear reactors and fuel for civilian use.
The India–United States Civil Nuclear Agreement also referred to as the "123 Agreement", signed on October
10, 2008, is a bilateral agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation which governs civil nuclear trade between
American and Indian firms to participate in each other's civil nuclear energy sector.[239][240] For the
agreement to be operational, nuclear vendors and operators must comply with India's 2010 Nuclear Liability
Act which stipulates that nuclear suppliers, contractors and operators must bear financial responsibility in
case of an accident.
Prominent industrial accidents (1984 Bhopal chemical-gas disaster and the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster)
have led to greater scrutiny by civil society into corporate responsibility and financial liability obligations of
vendors and operators of critical infrastructure. In 2010, the Indian Parliament voted to pass the Civil
Liability for Nuclear Damage Act to address concerns and provide civil liability for nuclear damage and
prompt compensation to the victims of a nuclear incident.
On March 27, 2019, India and the US signed an agreement to "strengthen bilateral security and civil nuclear
cooperation" including the construction of six American nuclear reactors in India.[241]
India's contribution to the War on Terror has helped India's diplomatic relations with several countries. Over
the past few years, India has held numerous joint military exercises with United States and European nations
that have resulted in a strengthened US-India and EU-India bilateral relationship. India's bilateral trade with
Europe and US has more than doubled in the last five years.
However, India has not signed the CTBT, or the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, claiming the
discriminatory nature of the treaty that allows the five declared nuclear countries of the world to keep their
nuclear arsenal and develop it using computer simulation testing. Prior to its nuclear testing, India had
pressed for a comprehensive destruction of nuclear weapons by all countries of the world in a time-bound
frame. This was not favoured by the United States and by certain other countries. Presently, India has
declared its policy of "no-first use of nuclear weapons" and the maintenance of a "credible nuclear
deterrence". The USA, under President George W. Bush has also lifted most of its sanctions on India and has
resumed military co-operation. Relations with USA have considerably improved in the recent years, with the
two countries taking part in joint naval exercises off the coast of India and joint air exercises both in India as
well as in the United States.[242][243][244]
India has been pushing for reforms in the United Nations and in the World Trade Organization with mixed
results. India's candidature for a permanent seat at the UN Security Council is currently backed by several
countries including Russia, United Kingdom, France, Germany, Japan, Brazil, African Union nations and
United States. In 2005, the United States signed a nuclear co-operation agreement with India even though
Easing of Tension
Post–September 11
U.S. President George W. Bush and
Indian Prime Minister Manmohan
Singh during a meeting with Indian
and American business leaders in
New Delhi in March 2006
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
and Indian Export Inspection
Council officials review a
memorandum of understanding on
food safety in 2015
the latter is not a part of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The United States agreed that India's strong
nuclear non-proliferation record made it an exception and persuaded other Nuclear Suppliers Group
members to sign similar deals with India.
On March 2, 2006, India and the United States signed the Indo-US Nuclear Pact on co-operation in civilian
nuclear field. This was signed during the four days state visit of USA President George Bush in India. On its
part, India would separate its civilian and military nuclear programmes, and the civilian programmes would
be brought under the safeguards of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The United States would sell
India the reactor technologies and the nuclear fuel for setting up and upgrading its civilian nuclear
programme. The US Congress needs to ratify this pact since US federal law prohibits the trading of nuclear
technologies and materials outside the framework of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG).
The United States is one of India's largest direct investors. From 1991 to 2004, the stock of FDI inflow has
increased from US$11 million to $344.4 million, and totaling $4.13 billion. This is a compound rate increase
of 57.5 percent annually. Indian direct investments abroad began in 1992, and Indian corporations and
registered partnership firms now can and do invest in businesses up to 100 percent of their net worth. India's
largest outgoing investments are in the manufacturing sector, which accounts for 54.8 percent of the
country's foreign investments. The second largest are in non-financial services (software development),
accounting for 35.4 percent of investments. According to the data of the commerce ministry, in 2021–22,
bilateral trade in goods between the two countries crossed $119.42 billion. Exports to the US increased to
$76.11 billion in 2021-22 from $51.62 billion in previous fiscal year, while imports rose to $43.31 billion as
compared to about $29 billion in 2020–21.[245]
The United States is India's largest trading partner since 2021,[245] and
India is its 7th largest trading partner.
[246] In 2017, the US exported
$25.7 billion worth of goods to India, and imported $48.6 billion worth
of Indian goods.[247] Major items imported from India include
information technology services, textiles, machinery, gems and
diamonds, chemicals, iron and steel products, coffee, tea, and other
edible food products. Major American items imported by India include
aircraft, fertilisers, computer hardware, scrap metal, and medical
equipment.[248][249]
The United States is also India's largest investment partner, with a direct
investment of $10 billion (accounting for 9 percent of total foreign
investment). Americans have made notable foreign investments in the
Asian country's power generation, telecommunications, ports, roads,
petroleum exploration and processing, and mining industries.[249]
American imports from India amounted to $46.6 billion or 2% of its
overall imports, and 15.3% of India's overall exports in 2015. Major
commodities exported from India to the US include[250][251] Gems,
precious metals and coins, Pharmaceuticals, Oil, Machinery, Textiles
(including knit & crochet), Organic chemicals, Vehicles, and Iron or steel
products
American exports to India amounted to $20.5 billion or 5.2% of India's
overall imports in 2015. Major commodities exported from the US to
India include:[252][253] Gems, precious metals and coins, Machinery,
Electronic equipment, Medical equipment, Oil, Aircraft/spacecraft,
Plastics, Organic chemicals, fruits and nuts.
Economic relations
Trade relations
In July 2005, President Bush and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh created a new programme called the
Trade Policy Forum.[254] It is run by a representative from each nation. The United States Trade
Representative was Rob Portman, and the Indian Commerce Secretary then-Minister of Commerce Kamal
Nath. The goal of the programme is to increase bilateral trade and investment flow. There are five main subdivisions of the Trade Policy Forum, including The Agricultural Trade group, which has three main
objectives: agreeing on terms that will allow India to export mangoes to the United States, permitting India's
Agricultural and Process Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) to certify Indian products
to the standards of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and executing regulation procedures for approving
edible wax on fruit.
The goals of the Tariff and Non-Tariff Barriers group include agreeing that insecticides manufactured by US
companies can be sold throughout India. India had also agreed to cut special regulations on trading
carbonated drinks, many medicinal drugs, and lowering regulations on many imports that are not of an
agricultural nature. Both nations have agreed to discuss improved facets of Indian regulation in the trade of
jewellery, computer parts, motorcycles, fertiliser, and those tariffs that affect American exporting of boric
acid. The group has also discussed matters such as those wishing to break into the accounting market, Indian
companies gaining licenses for the telecommunications industry, and setting policies regarding Indian media
and broadcasting markets. Other foci include the exchange of valuable information on recognizing different
professional services, discussing the movement and positioning of people in developing industries,
continuation of talks on financial services markets, limitation of equities, insurance, retail, joint investment
in agricultural processing and transportation industries, and small business initiatives.
On August 3, 2018, India became the third Asian nation to be granted Strategic Trade Authorization-1 (STA1) status by the United States. STA-1 enables the export of high-technology products in civil space and
defence from the US to India.[255][256]
On February 15, 2023, Air India announced an order of 470 jets, out of which 220 jets would be bought from
Boeing and the other 250 from Airbus. This is one of the biggest aircraft orders in the commercial jet
industry. The deal was acknowledged by both the POTUS and the PMO of India.[257]
During Modi's visit in 2023, resolution of six of seven outstanding WTO disputes between the US and India
through mutually agreed solutions, market access.[216]
On January 31, 2023, the US-India Civil Space Joint Working Group (CSJWG) met for the eighth time. The
group is a collaboration of space agencies ISRO and NASA. The CSJWG has planned to launch The NASAISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR) mission in 2024 which is expected to map Earth using two different
radar frequencies to monitor resources like water, forests, and agriculture.[258]
In January 2023, the national security advisors of India and the U.S. announced the launch of the U.S.-India
Initiative on Critical and Emerging Technologies (iCET). Under iCET, both sides will work together in the
fields of artificial intelligence, quantum technologies, advanced wireless technology, space and
semiconductor supply chain resilience.[259]
India signed the Artemis Accords in 2023, joining 26 other countries working on exploration of the Moon,
Mars, and beyond. And NASA will provide advanced training to ISRO astronauts with the goal of launching a
joint effort to the International Space Station in 2024.[216]
India-U.S. relations grew strategically in the early 1960s, as the rise of the People's Republic of China worried
policymakers in Washington, D.C.. The Chinese government's assertion in Tibet, its role in the Korean War,
and other such acts concerned Washington. As relations between India and China were heated during the late
fifties, the Americans found a golden opportunity to take advantage of this situation to promote India as a
counterweight to China.[260]
Science and technology
India-US strategic partnership
Prime Minister Narendra Modi with
President Barack Obama in the
Oval Office in September 2014
U.S. and Indian Army soldiers
during the opening ceremony of
Yudh Abhyas military exercise in
November 2022
After the end of the Cold War, Indian and American interests converged
in a number of areas, including counter-terrorism, promotion of
democracy, counter-proliferation, freedom of navigation in the Indian
Ocean, and the balance of power in Asia.[260]
As the world's oldest and largest democracies, respectively, the U.S. and
India share historic ties.[261] India is a founding member of the
"Community of Democracies"—a prominent endeavor of the United
States on promotion of democracy. However, India rejected a suggestion
by the USA about setting up a Centre for Asian Democracy.[262]
India emerged in the 21st century as increasingly vital to core US foreign
policy interests. India, a dominant actor in its region, and the home of
more than one billion citizens, is now often characterised as a nascent
Great Power and an "indispensable partner" of the US, one that many
analysts view as a potential counterweight to the growing clout of
China.
[263]
In a meeting between President George W. Bush and Prime Minister Atal
Bihari Vajpayee in November 2001, the two leaders expressed a strong
interest in transforming the US-India bilateral relationship. High-level
meetings and concrete cooperation between the two countries increased
during 2002 and 2003. In January 2004, the US and India launched the
"Next Steps in Strategic Partnership" (NSSP), which was both a
milestone in the transformation of the bilateral relationship and a
blueprint for its further progress.[264] In July 2005, Bush hosted Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh in Washington, D.C. The two leaders
announced the successful completion of the NSSP, as well as other
agreements which further enhanced cooperation in the areas of civil nuclear, civil space, and high-technology
commerce. Other initiatives announced included a US-India economic dialogue, the fight Against HIV/AIDS,
disaster relief, technology cooperation, an agriculture knowledge initiative, a trade policy forum, energy
dialogue, CEO Forum, and an initiative to assist each other in furthering democracy and freedom.[265]
President Bush made a reciprocal visit to India in March 2006, during which the progress of these initiatives
were reviewed, and new initiatives were launched.[89]
Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh was the guest of honour at the first state dinner of the
administration of US President Barack Obama, which took place on 24 November 2009. Obama later visited
India from 6–9 November 2010, signing numerous trade and defence agreements with India. He addressed
the joint session of the Indian parliament in New Delhi, becoming only the second US president to do so, and
announced that the United States would lend its support to India's bid for a permanent seat in the United
Nations Security Council, signifying the growing strategic dimension of the relationship between the world's
two largest democracies.[266] During US President Trump's visit to India in 2020, both sides agree to
establish “Comprehensive Global Strategic Partnership”.[267]
In both the 2017 Doklam standoff and the 2020–2021 China–India skirmishes, the United States provided
India with intelligence it possessed, and the two sides discussed the crisis on Ladakh border. The US was also
involved in securing the release of Indian pilot Abhinandan Varthaman from Pakistani custody following the
2019 Balakot airstrike.
[268] The US played a role in extinguishing tensions between India and Pakistan in
2019, when Pakistan and India were at the verge of nuclear war, as per the claim of former US secretary of
state Mike Pompeo.
[269]
On October 27, 2020, US and India signed a military agreement on sharing sensitive satellite data. The Basic
Exchange and Cooperation Agreement, or BECA, allows the US's strategic partners to access a range of
sensitive geospatial and aeronautical data which is useful for military actions.[270]
In December 2020, US India Business Council president Nisha Desai Biswal claimed that the ties between
the two nations will continue and grow stronger in 2021, as the Biden administration will prioritize their
trade deals for a prospering economic relationship.[271]
In December 2022, based on BECA, the United States provided real-time location information of the PLA
soldiers to help India rout China, during the confrontation in Arunachal Pradesh.
[272]
The purchase of S-400 missile system by India, resulted in an imbroglio in the US Congress.
[273] Previously,
the Trump administration admonished India that it might entice economic sanctions by the United
States.[274][275] But since India looms as a counterweight to China, the significance of India is creeping upon
the US Senate. Following that, two major Senators John Cornyn from the Republican Party and Mark Warner
from the Democratic Party urged president Joe Biden to waive sanctions against New Delhi as it might
euthanize the cumulative cooperation with India to maintain the hegemony of the United States of America
across the region of South Asia & the Indian Ocean region.[276][277]
Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, India abstained on a United Nations resolution showing
disapproval of (but not politically condemning) the invasion, saying it was "deeply disturbed" by Russia's
invasion. Some experts have also pointed out that the reason for India's abstention is because 70% of Indian
arms imports are from Russia, 14% from the US, and 5% from Israel.
[278] In a meeting of the Quadrilateral
Security Dialogue on the implications of the crisis for the region, President Biden noted India's abstention,
saying that most global allies were united against Russia.[279] Speaking to the US Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, US diplomat Donald Lu said the Biden administration was still considering sanctions against
India over its S-400 deal with Russia, and its abstention at the UN.[280] On 15 July 2022, the United States
House of Representatives passed a legislative amendment that granted India a waiver from CAATSA-related
sanctions connected to the purchase of the S-400; however the amendment has yet to be passed by the
United States Senate.
[281]
While some officials of Ukraine have called for Western sanctions against India over its heavy buying of
Russian oil, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Karen Donfried told
reporters in February 2023: "We are not looking to sanction India. Our partnership with India is one of our
most consequential relationships."[282] In the wake of the Russo-Ukrainian War, the U.S. has ruled out
secondary sanctions against India for its considerable oil imports or defence engagement from Russia.[190]
During the run-off to the 2014 Indian general election, there was wide-ranging scepticism regarding the
future of the India–U.S. strategic relationship. Narendra Modi, whose US visa had been revoked while he was
the Chief Minister of Gujarat, had been boycotted by US officials for almost a decade[283] for his alleged role
in the 2002 Gujarat riots.
[284] However, sensing Modi's inevitable victory well before the election, the US
Ambassabor Nancy Powell had reached out to him. Moreover, following his 2014 election as the Prime
Minister of India President Obama congratulated him over telephone and invited him to visit the
US.[285][286] US Secretary of State John Kerry visited New Delhi on 1 August to prepare the grounds for
Modi's first ever US visit as Prime Minister. In September 2014, days before visiting the US in an interview to
CNN's Fareed Zakaria, Modi said that "India and the United States are bound together, by history and
culture" but acknowledged that there have been "ups and downs" in relations.[287] Modi travelled to US from
27 to 30 September 2014,[288] beginning with his maiden address in the United Nations general assembly
followed by attending a gala public reception by the Indian American community in New York's Madison
Tensions over Russian relations
Diplomatic exchanges
Formal visits by counterparts (2014 onwards)
Modi's visit to America, 2014
Prime Minister Narendra Modi
meeting President Barack Obama
in the Oval Office at the White
House in Washington, D.C. in June
2016
Square Garden before heading Washington, D.C., for the bilateral talk with Obama. While there, Modi also
met several American business leaders and invited them to join his ambitious Make in India program in a bid
to make India a manufacturing hub.[289][290][291]
President Barack Obama became the first US president to be the chief
guest of the 66th Republic Day celebrations of India held on 26 January
2015.[292] India and the US held their first ever bilateral dialogue on the
UN and multilateral issues in the spirit of the "Delhi Declaration of
Friendship" that strengthens and expands the two countries' relationship
as part of the Post-2015 Development Agenda.[293] The conspicuous
absence of major announcements, a key indicator of the state of US
relations with the host country, led political commentators in both
countries to highlight the confidence-building aspects of the
visit.[294][295][296]
Prime Minister Narendra Modi toured the Silicon Valley and met with
entrepreneurs – several of whom are persons of Indian origin – involved in successful microelectronics,
digital communications and biotechnology start-ups to promote the NDA government's Make in India
initiative.[297] Modi left the U.S. West Coast and travelled to New York for the 2015 UN General Assembly
meeting where he had bilateral discussions with US President Barack Obama.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi while visiting the United States addressed a joint session of Congress
highlighting the common traits of both democracies and long-term friendship between the two countries.[298]
In a speech lasting more than 45 minutes, Mr. Modi drew on parallels between the two countries and
addressed a variety of issues where the two countries have worked together in the past and where the future
course of action would lie.[299]
On June 26, 2017, Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited the United States and met US President Donald
Trump. On 8 November 2017, the US announced a grant of nearly US$500,000 for organisations which came
up with ideas and projects to promote religious freedom in India and Sri Lanka.
In September 2019, Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited Houston, where he addressed a large Indian
American contingent at NRG Stadium. Along with President Donald Trump, he reaffirmed Indian American
ties, with an emphasis on increased military cooperation with the initiation of the Tiger Triumph
exercises.[300]
On February 24, 2020, U.S. President Donald Trump visited Ahmedabad, Gujarat to address a large Indian
crowd.[301] The event, titled "Namaste Trump", was a response to the "Howdy Modi" event held in 2019.[302]
Attendance of over 100,000 people was reported.[303] The event served as a platform for the U.S. president
and the Indian prime minister to show off their friendly relationship.[304]
Obama's visit to India, 2015
Modi's visit to America, 2015
Modi's visit to America, 2016
Modi's visit to America, 2017
Modi's visit to America, 2019
Trump's 2020 visit to India
Prime Minister Narendra Modi gifts
exemplar of Mahatma Gandhi's
three wise monkeys to President
Donald Trump in Ahmedabad in
February 2020
U.S. President Donald Trump and
Indian Prime Minister Narendra
Modi at Namaste Trump rally in
Ahmedabad, in February 2020
Trump also visited Agra, Uttar Pradesh and the Taj Mahal on the same
day.[305] In Agra, the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, Yogi Adityanath
welcomed the President and the First Lady. There were 3000 cultural
artists showcasing art, cultural & music of various regions.[306] However,
political commentators state that Trump's first official visit to India had
been overshadowed by the 2020 North East Delhi riots.
[307]
Modi traveled to US from 22 to 25 September 2021, beginning with his
maiden address in the United Nations general assembly before heading
Washington, D.C., for the bilateral talk with President Joe Biden and Vice
President Kamala Harris. While there, Modi also participated in the
Quad Leaders' Summit.
Prime Minister Modi traveled to the United States in June 2023.[308] It
was Modi's first state visit to the United States, and the second time he
has been invited to address a joint session of the U.S. Congress.
[309]
Modi and President Biden answered questions from reporters at a press
conference held in the White House.[310]
US Missions in India[311]
New Delhi (Embassy)
Mumbai (Consulate)
Kolkata (Consulate)
Chennai (Consulate)
Hyderabad (Consulate)
Bengaluru (Consulate, planned)
Ahmedabad (Consulate, planned)
Indian Missions in US[312]
Washington, DC (Embassy)
Houston (Consulate)
Chicago (Consulate)
New York (Consulate)
San Francisco (Consulate)
Seattle (Consulate, planned)
India portal
United States
portal
Politics portal
Modi's visit to America, 2021
Modi's visit to America, 2023
Embassies and Consulates
